Welcome to the fourth webcast of the PBC Morning Dawn Study Group at Palmasamyalang. Today we'll
be discussing the fourth chapter of the Venerable Khe BJPo Rinpoches, "The Buddhist Path",
which is entitled "Taking Refuge". So we'll begin with opening prayers.
Sathamantavadra, Bhaktasatha, Pramanavadra, Sri-sinkha, Padma-kara, the 25 King in subjects,
So-Zor-Nod-Nang, the 100 Tritons, and others, the Lammas of the Kama, the terminal images to you,
I pray. The supreme tradition of the glorious Buddha, Padma-sambhava, which is the essential,
extraordinary viewer and doctrine of the early translation school, you keep alive and spread by
the light of wisdom. Lord of Dharma, great temple, I pray at your lowest feet. In the palace of the
old man Dharmadaptu, the essence of all the Buddhists of the three times, the one who shows
clearly the Dharmakaya of my own mind, we pray to the honourable Rupa Guru, glorious Rupa teacher,
precious one, dwelling on the lowest seat on the crown of my head. Hold me with your great kindness
and bestow the accomplishments of body, speech, and mind.
And so we're beginning this today's discussion group. We're going to be talking on the fourth
chapter from Rinpoche's book, the Buddhist Path, which begins on page 23. And so the
subject is taking refuge and kind of the main points of the kind of first section that we're
going to be going over are really what it is to take refuge and looking a little more at that
outer meaning of refuge. And so basically the main points that Rinpoche's go across
are that refuge is taking the first step in practicing Buddhism in all the Buddhist traditions,
Hinayana, Mahayana, Vajrayana, and that the seed or cause of taking refuge is that closeness
feeling
and interest in what are known as the three objects of refuge, which are namely the Buddha,
Dharma, and Sangha. And then they go over a little more on what the outer meaning of taking them
are,
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. That's really the first main points.
Directly from the book, the first point is the first step in practicing Buddhism according to
the three traditions of Hinayana, Mahayana, and Vajrayana is to take refuge. The seed or cause for
taking refuge is a feeling of interest and closeness to the three objects of refuge, the Buddha,
the Dharma, and the Sangha. On the outer level, the Buddha is the person who gave the teachings,
he is the guide. The Dharma is the teachings, it is a guidebook that describes where to go.
The Sangha are the beings who follow the path described by the Dharma.
One of the things that came up for me while I was reading.
So I was thinking about the quality of refuge because I think, particularly for people who
are new to this, like myself, one of the things that can almost become a little confusing is how
once taking refuge on an outer level, we're making a prostration, or however we take refuge
in something very physical that's considered in front of us, that's considered very external.
But then we're going to go into this a little bit later about how there's the inner level too,
and all the different levels, which makes it not as external. So what's the kind of quality
that one takes, particularly when you're looking at the outer level of refuge,
that not only respects that outer level of the Buddha and the Dharma and the Sangha, but then
also respects the fact that we're going to be sinking into all these different levels.
I don't know, it seems to me it's definitely recognizing that they're connected,
that really outer inner is connected. And so I don't know, and in this case, I mean,
ultimately the Buddha said, "We all have Buddha nature and we all can realize that, all beings
without exception." But because we do have ignorance and ego clinging and that we are
obscured, then we have something to look to and to move our mind toward. So in this case, we have
Buddha Shakyamuni, who is the expression in this world of all these inherent beautiful qualities
that everyone has. And out of that limitless compassion of Buddha Shakyamuni is all of the
teachings, our expressions of his wisdom and compassion, and all of those beings who've
taken those teachings to heart and practiced it then. And like Rinpoche's mentioned, whether they
're
other ordinary people or those who are hearts and bodhisattvas and all of the
fully realized Buddhas, the noble Sangha, we have their support. It's like kind of that guidance
and that support and these clear kind of reliable instructions to put to view. So
it's kind of that we realize. They themselves are expressions of those beautiful inner
qualities shining forth, but ours are a little more obscure. So then we have these beautiful
examples and these living lineage masters and all of those things to connect with on the outer.
You know, I think that's what it means by outer. These are the things coming that we have to look
toward and connect, begin to connect with us. I mean, I'm sure if anyone else says.
Yeah, that just reminded me of something nice that I read in this, eliminating the path.
I'm just kind of, you know, on this topic of refuge that just right in the very beginning,
there's a nice quote of Vimalamitra that says, "When we clearly know the suffering of samsara,
as well as the qualities of enlightened beings, then we can go for refuge." So it's just kind of,
it's, you know, really to the point, but it's just so beautiful. It made me kind of imagine that,
you know, through duality mind, we have this gap. We see a gap between ourselves and enlightened
beings, you know, and there is, you know, if we have duality mind, there is a gap. But this process
of taking refuge is this first step of closing that gap of saying, oh, you know, there is samsara,
there is suffering, there are sentient beings, and there are enlightened beings who have totally
removed that and totally, fully touched that Buddha nature and, you know, completely revealed that
without, you know, ever going back. And so that taking refuge is really like that, acknowledging
that and seeing, wow, this is something extraordinary and, you know, something that I can, I'd like
to
do too, you know, so it's kind of the bridging the gap for the first step. I think it's really,
like a really important part is that what you said in that first statement, like seeing samsara
clearly, and that's on the outer level, like we need to take refuge. If we have these troubles,
we have these ways we get caught in ups and downs and good times, bad times. If we have this
fluctuating based on our grasping, there's no other choice but to take refuge in something that's
reliable, stable. I mean, if we don't see the ups and downs of life as being a problem, or if we
think it's unavoidable, then we won't go for refuge anyway, because we think that's just how it is.
There's nothing stable in life. But then if we see, oh, is there something stable in life? Is
it possible to have a complete lasting, unchanging happiness to benefit all beings? Then if we see
that as a possibility, like you said, or Vimala Mitra said, we see this enlightened quality so
that is possible, then it becomes a very strong, urge, not stable yet, they're stable. Then it's
just a question of relying on something like, oh, how can I actually actualize that myself?
And refuge is a very practical, outward-level refuge. What other option do we have
if we're not stable already? And it seems like that is that first moment of
moving from it being external to it being more internal, because it is external until you start
to see, like, that you can see it in yourself a little bit, you know, oh, I do have for the
nature a little bit, you know, and then a little more, a little more, a little more, until, you
know,
along the path of the whole way. So that's that, to me, that's that process of moving from the
external
to the internal. What you're both saying sounds like the Four Noble Truths first are studied
to understand the suffering, and then the path, the beginning, you take refuge. So what Vimala
Maitreya said first, you understand the suffering, which is from, like, the Four Noble Truths, and
the last is the path. You take refuge and join this is the path.
I think, well, I think what both of you all said, I mean, is it, it's a, from the, from the outer
level, like, I think here, you can really distinguish between the Hinayana, the Mahayana,
and the Tantrayana, and make it as complex or deep as you want to go, because within the
Vajrayana, there's the outer, the inner, the secret, the ultimate, that's just the Vajrayana.
But I think the basis of refuge, like, like you guys were saying is, we need help, you know,
like, we're not enlightened, you know, we're struggling. And from the Hinayana point of view,
you take refuge in the symbolic outer three jewels of the Buddha, Dhamma, and Sangha as an external
thing, that's the, that's the object. And then the duration is, for example, for this lifetime,
you take refuge for this lifetime, and the scope is the reason the motivation is because you fear
the sufferings of samsara, because you're, you're in trouble, you fear samsara and all the bad
things
that can happen there, so you take it that way. But then once you get to the Mahayana, it's, it's
already a, it's a different thing, because the object is like the, the Dhamma Kaya, the Sambhari
Kaya, the Ramana Kaya, the duration is until you attain enlightenment, you know, complete
enlightenment forever. So you take refuge from now until I attain enlightenment, that's when you
take
refuge. And then for, and then the motivation is not just for yourself, because you fear the
suffering
of samsara, but because all beings are in, are in trouble and going through the difficulties. So,
so I take refuge until I attain complete enlightenment and lead all beings to that
state of enlightenment. So it gets like, in that sense, like Lodra's question, it gets
you know, deeper and deeper and deeper. It's not like they're separate things, but it's just like,
you know, then you can keep going there from like the Vadryana, you know, into the Vadryana, you,
but basically we know we won't get, take refuge in money, because we've tried and it doesn't work,
you know, we can't take refuge in something unstable. So ultimately you have to take refuge
in something that's beyond samsara, because you can't take refuge in samsara. So the only thing
beyond samsara is, well the major ones online is always beyond samsara, but the one who fully
realizes that through the wisdoms and the kaidas is a fully enlightened Buddha. That's what you,
that's what you have to take refuge in.
The thing I was thinking of was connected with what you were reading was that how this ties back
in with those three kinds of faith, the three kinds of devotion, that you have that inspiration,
that aspiration, and then the certainty, and so you take refuge. So it's very, very closely
connected.
All these topics are really like the refuges, they all support each other.
Maybe elaborating? I'm curious, like when the different levels are...
Well, I was just thinking in terms of these, these kinds of fundamental teachings that,
like Dara's pointing out, how there's refuge. I mean, how the refuge is connected with four
noble truths in terms of seeing suffering and its cause, seeing the path, you know, and its
fruition, and so you take refuge. And then just the same with the three kinds of faith that, you
know,
you're inspired by, say, seeing the Buddha. You aspire to be like him. You know, you have this
conviction after you really look into the Dharma that it's actually true, and you see noble beings
who are following it, and so you have this certainty that, yes, this is something I can take refuge
in.
And it's just, it's just so profound. I mean, just like what we're all saying, like
you can see Rinpoche say, also in this Illuminating the Path, but at the very end,
the last point they make is that refuge is such a profound practice that really it could be your
only practice, and you would achieve the full result only through this practice. And it's just
really, wow, you know, like everything we're saying, you can kind of see why that's true,
because it's really like this umbrella that does kind of hold all the essential, the essential
meaning of Buddhism, and the Dharma, and the Path. It's really everything in a sense.
The English word refuge, right? It's a shelter we seek. I mean, somebody could be in a dictionary,
but it's the shelter you seek in times of need, right? It's a refuge, right? Or something like that
.
But, so, getting to the point of realizing the only use, you know, the only things, the only
activities or thoughts that are going to provide you with this safe haven, this place to find
respite, you're going to be within the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha somehow, right?
So you sort of give up, like you said, give up the idea that something other than within that,
within that ambit, or whatever you would say, is going to give you what you need, you know,
money, or alcohol, or, you know, it's sort of like a promise you're making, is that
I will go to these things. I will make an effort to look at my mama, look at my Sangha, and listen,
read the Dharma to find the answers solace, or at least comfort. It's beautiful, too,
because the Sanskrit word Dharma translates directly to protection. I've seen it translate
a number of ways, but one of them, I think, particularly even in the book here, either
the Buddhist path or illuminating the path, you know, it translates to protection.
Right there, yes, page 23. Yeah, and then refuge is also translated as protection, and I think
it's in this book, so it's just beautiful, just like that sense of why is it a protection,
and it's really that, like what you're saying is that, or they'll use the word infallible,
they're infallible, like there's all these other things that we might really try and just keep
trying, you know, but they really, at some point we see they really don't work, and that with
contemplation, and really looking at the Buddha, and the Dharma, and the Sangha, and why, and why,
they're really, like, unfailing, you know, I love that word they usually use in prayer.
And I think, like what Anne talked about, too, the way that the devotion and interest, like that
element, too, as much as how, just how vital that is, and the more we look at the Buddha on any
level,
it just inspires, and all the Buddha's beautiful qualities, and life stories, and previous lives,
and then all the different levels of the Buddha, you know, outer, inner, secret, whatever, and the
same with the Dharma, all the words of the Buddha, all the meanings, all the three basket, I mean,
everything, you know, just the more we become familiar, all the Sangha, their life stories,
their qualities, and abilities, and, I mean, just all of that, just, like you said, I mean,
it's just so complete, like, within, Buddha, Dharma, Sangha holds everything, every level,
and then inspires, like, that devotional, like, like, thing that just, you know, opens.
I think that's why it can be a concrete path, is because of that, is because that's,
that's what we're trying to do, is really open fully, you know, our hearts, and our minds, and
that's what, that feeling that you're talking about, or that inspiration, and devotion,
and appreciation, which is always remind us of, you know, our encompass within refuge.
And that confidence to stay open, and, and live in your softness. Yeah, you know what I mean?
It's like anything else that we would look to, there's always maybe this edge of,
how can I be sure? So, so it's in those times of need, if you have a place that you can go with
ultimate confidence, and know that for thousands of years, these teachings, and it has, you know,
have really brought people to, to other places, and staying open in that softness, even in
all kinds of moments. That's, that's something you're gonna find at work, you know, or,
you know, or any other places that we have gone in the past to find that feeling.
Yeah, and I wanted to kind of follow up too, on what Lyle was saying too, in terms of seeing how,
but just that whole sense of, you know, that the more you explore the Buddha, the Dharma, and the
Sangha, it's like, endlessly rich. You can never really get to the end of the Dharma, there's
always
more to uncover, in terms of one's own mind and heart, you know, there's just, there's always
more, it's just, it's limitless. So, so wonderful. Yeah, and when you connect with that, it's like,
I always love when, you know, like, we've all seen, I think most of us, I think we've all taken
refuge
here, but, you know, like, when you see somebody who they're like, "Oh, I'm taking refuge!" You
know,
like, "I want to take refuge, like, on Saturday," or whatever, like, everyone who comes through
here,
and that feeling, and that quality, it just has, you know, I think the essence of refuge, you know,
somebody's like, they're excited, they're uplifted, they're, you know, you see them after they take
refuge, they have a new name, it's like a birthday, they feel like it's the beginning of the end,
you
know, it's the beginning of the end of all this wandering, you know, and you see people, and you
feel they're, you know, like, it's just such a, it's such a happy thing, yeah, and I think that's
the
partially, that's the essence of refuge, you know, even if we talk about all the different levels
and
depths and details, but the essence is, if we remember that, and we connect with that, and like,
why are people so happy when they take refuge? They're so happy because the chains are falling,
you know, it's like this story in Tibetan, just a really quick story of this bandit who he was
going
through the, maybe I won't tell correctly, but he's going through the town, he's a robber, he's a
bandit, he steals something, he steals something from the town, and he runs, and people chase after
him, he runs to escape, and he goes and hides under this bridge where these harmful spirits live,
and so he wasn't particularly religious or had no really faith in the Three Jewels,
but then these, you know, night was falling, and he was hiding under there, and these beings came
back, and they said, "Oh, look at this one," you know, easy praying, you know, lunch, or whatever,
they're going towards him, and he realized, "Oh, no, I'm done for it," but then he thought,
and he heard all the people taking refuge in the Three Jewels in the town, and he had heard that,
and he just, out of his panic and terror, he said, "I take refuge in the Three Jewels, I take
refuge
in the Buddha, I take refuge in the Dharma, refuge in the Sangha," over and over, and the second
they
heard that, all those malevolent beings, they screamed, they said, "Oh, no, this one's under
the protection of the Three Jewels. We have no power," and they just ran and turned because the
power of the Three Jewels of protecting, like you said, the word darling, but anyway, so you're
protected, you know, when you really take refuge, even if you die, you're protected because you
have,
you know, you just have the vast view, you know. And that, too, kind of that point, like how you
mentioned when we take refuge, like when we take the formal, make that connection with the lineage,
and we have that, but then how taking refuge is the gateway to all Buddhist practice,
and no matter what we're doing, we always start every session taking refuge, and like that point,
even if it's just like a simple line, but you know, first I always say, you know, the Four
Thoughts, you know, thinking of that, but then always thinking of all these qualities of our
situation, like the Four Thoughts that turn the mind toward the Dharma, or the Buddha Dharma Sangha
,
you know, and then how taking refuge is not only in our life begins this beautiful path, but every
session, every day, you know, how that, it's like, you know, it's that doorway that opens up for
our
session and our practice, and like opens and softens our heart and mind, and reminds us of our
joy and devotion and courage and commitment, and you know, our inspiration and what our,
you know, kind of redirecting, correcting our goal, and then beginning our practice with that,
and then with the Bodhichitta, and then the particular practice, but kind of the way,
like that whole, even if it's like just a few lines, it's still, we're not just saying those
words, but really connecting with that beautiful meaning that's so lush and full, and then kind of
the way that just really, also I just thought to mention, we're getting kind of, maybe just have
about five or ten more minutes, so maybe we just kind of go over the next section of the chapter,
and asking you, should I, our points don't necessarily cover the whole chapter, should I just
go through the basic points? Okay, so the next section we're going through, Rinpoche is talking
more on the inner meaning of what it is to take refuge, and how that the inner level is of taking
refuge is more connecting and relating to our own mind, and how the Buddha is the primordial
nature itself, one's own pure awareness, you know, the absolute Buddha, it's always there from
beginningless time, our very, you know, nature, primordial nature, and how the Dharma is what
happens, you know, when we connect to that nature, and maintain all the qualities of our mind's
primordial nature, and radiate that, and breathe that with all beings, and then went over some of
the word meanings of Dharma, and the inner meaning of Sangha, and then went over again looking at
one word meaning of inseparable, and looking at the inseparable clarity and emptiness of the mind,
and how that's connected with skillful means and wisdom that's always present
with everything that's arising and of the nature, and that having that faith and closeness to the
true nature, and then they continue just kind of going over who takes refuge, and how anyone with
joyful interest and devotion to the three jewels can go for refuge, and how long do we take refuge
until we actualize our Buddhahood, at which point we become an object of refuge, and then they
conclude the chapter with kind of the ceremony of the tradition and the lineage by which we
actually
affirm and connect with the living lineage of Buddha Shakyamuni, the Dharma, and the Sangha,
and go over some of the main points of the actual refuge ceremony, and kind of stress the
importance
how bodhichitta is a really essential element of that, kind of the main points for the rest of the
chapter. Maybe I'll just read the second point. The three refuges also have an inner meaning
related to the mind. The mind's primordial nature is totally pure, clear, and enlightened from
beginningless time. One's own pure awareness is the primordial Buddha. Buddha actually means the
perfect understanding that is free from all deluded and dualistic thinking. This is the absolute
Buddha.
Maintaining the qualities of the primordial nature and radiating them to all sentient beings
is the inner meaning of taking refuge in the absolute Dharma. The inner Sangha is also
contained within the mind. This refers to the inseparability of clarity and emptiness as the
true nature of the mind. Clarity and emptiness are always present, and that is the meaning of the
absolute Sangha. It's interesting, this is like all these descriptions of nature of mind,
saying that is the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha. Particularly with all these different levels
,
are they more accessed based on the depth of our practice, or is it more about the way that we're,
like if we're looking at like a Vajrayana versus, maybe not so much versus, but like in contrast to
like a more Mahayana view, is that where it comes into play more and how the teachings approach it,
or does it really have to do with, you know, the outer is the most obvious, that's where your
practice is going to make it obvious, then from there the inner becomes more obvious, then like
the secret. How is it that they relate to each other in that way? I think it's definitely a
spectrum
of subtlety. So if our mind is really tense and holding really tightly, then all we have available
is what's very obvious, because our mind is being held so tightly, and as a grasping, even if it's
for a minute, or for longer, as the grasping lessens, then more inner, more subtle workings
of causation, of how our mind is working become more apparent to our mind, and become more
interesting to our mind, to actually pay attention to those things as well. But definitely a
spectrum
of subtlety. I know in this, um, illuminating the path, this is the outer refuge is the three
jewels,
and then they divide into inner refuge, secret refuge, ultimate refuge. So there's an inner
refuge is the three roots. Secret refuge is the inner, like how the element or silo, how the inner
structures of our body went in terms of more subtle levels of our body structure, how we use those
to
recognize our primordial nature. And then the ultimate level is the, our primordial nature,
not relying on any support, but like effortlessly accessing how our mind is when it's balanced
without any grasping. It's definitely a function of how much grasping is happening in our mind,
or if there is no grasping, with what becomes what degree of refuge makes sense to us in that time.
And so it sounds like from what you're saying, in this second point, that the inner meaning
rapiches are really emphasizing, at least in this book, is the, like that innermost, like the
ultimate ultimate. And they're talking about the, the Buddha being our pure awareness itself,
the dharma being the natural qualities that are just radiating, um, and then that the sangha,
the absolute sangha is the inseparability of clarity and emptiness. Which I thought it was
nice that you included that here on the, kind of under these concepts and terms on this sheet,
because for me it was helpful just to read that the sangha, the absolute sangha is defined as the
all-pervading, all-encompassing quality of the mind. Sometimes, yeah, anyway I just thought that,
that helps sort of fill out that definition of what is the absolute sangha.
And so that space, that description, comes from the Sangha Sridhariviches,
like condensed explanation of the relative and absolute levels of taking refuge, which isn't
from illuminating the path. And then as to the inner and secret, it's really interesting because
here in this Buddhist path, the most outer and most inner, and then it's good that we know what's
in between too, because if we think we can go from the most outer to the most inner, and that's all
,
usually it's a little bit of a develop, developing, have to become more subtle.
It's hard to go from dense grasping to no grasping as a path, so it's interesting that point.
These aren't things we do anyway, right? What do you mean? Well,
I don't know. Seems to me that it has to do with practice, and like you said,
mind is certain way, and practice, and then it gets more flexible, and the naughty's getting
gnotted, and you, you know, you're purified, and then it gets, you know, I mean, it's not something
you, I mean, the outer refuge, we go and we take it, right? We can do that. And all of a sudden,
things seem that they have to develop through us and conditions. So it is something we do. Oh,
absolutely with courage. And that seems kind of part of, like you said, there's these
out the absolute level and the outer level, and then there's that path of, of realization to
unfolding. But that, especially with that last part on how we take refuge in the Sangha on the
absolute level as all appearances and their nature, all the emptiness and appearance,
skillful means and wisdom in a way. I mean, to me, it seems like that really touches on how
to the best of our ability, when we're really practicing and touching home,
that realizing we're working with our own mind, you know, no matter where we are, whatever our
capacity is, or how that might fluctuate, or that we're always working with our own mind,
and that we trust in its absolute nature. And in that way, everything becomes a teaching.
I mean, if we're working with our experience with that type of right, engaging with it that way,
like everyone we see becomes the Sangha because their support for our maintaining that
understanding.
You know, it's everything really. That's pretty, that's amazing.
And I think that's also why this is chapter four, because chapter one is saying we need to calm the
mind, taking the mind. Chapter two is how is our mind when it's all being conditioned by all of
its grasping. Chapter three, how it's the nature of our mind when it's not grasping onto everything
.
And then chapter four, so when we recognize this difference, like a totally balanced mind,
it's effortless and available, balanced, versus this grasping mind that's always struggling,
then what's the path? How do we go from where we are grasping to how we can be when we're not
grasping? That really makes sense that this is, it is all the mind, and it's really beautiful.
I don't know which is a very thoroughly established that up to this point in the book, I think,
very clearly. And how could it be otherwise, you know, that it's one zone mind that recognizes this
,
this one zone mind that recognizes the outer three jewels of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.
One zone mind that recognizes the, you know, the inner three jewels, or the channels,
winds and essence elements. One zone mind that works with the three Vajras states and the Vajrayana
,
and one zone mind that's the nature of one's own mind too. So it's like God said too, the subtlety
of, you know, you can only be aware of what you're aware of, you know, so if you're not aware of
the
luminous nature of your mind, or you don't fully recognize the nature of your mind, then you work
with your mind to become aware of that by following the path and taking refuge according to your
capabilities until you will, you'll include all four or all those types of refuge in one moment,
because you'll be at that stage where you recognize that and you're aware of that.
But even, and I think we have to wrap it up pretty soon, but even just the title of the book,
I mean here it was changed to the Buddhist path, but what is the Buddhist path? It was the title
of the Shakespeare, opening to our primordial nature. And the light of the three jewels.
Yeah, they came every time too, because everybody suggested the title. They said, "Oh no, Anne."
That's more mudra. Oh, okay. So anyway, so let's call it the light of the three jewels.
So then it has continued to flow. This is what we're talking about.
Light of the three jewels, Buddha Dharma Sangha, opening us to our primordial nature.
The Buddhist path. The Buddhist path. We will dedicate the merit, and of course there's some
so rich and this opens up infinite, you know, richness in our practice and study and reflection
and meditation.
So,
so
by this merit may all attain omniscience.
So, so by this merit may all attain omniscience. And so, so by this merit may all attain omnis
cience.
And so, so by this merit may all attain omniscience. And so, so by this merit may all attain omnis
At this very moment for the peoples and nations of the earth may not even the names, disease,
famine, war, and suffering be heard, but rather may pure conduct, merit, wealth, and prosperity
increase and may supreme good fortune and well-being always arise. The precious bodhicitta and
those
without it may it be generated and those who have it may it never diminish but always continue
increasing. May the great tradition of kenpo, shangta, rakshida, lord nonpana, sambhava,
and dharma king, tristan, detsan increase and spread throughout the three realm world.
May the appearance of the three jewels and the mind streams of beings remain inseparable and
brings to long well-being throughout the three times. Theating mantra and dharma kaya are the
nature of appearance, sound, and awareness. The pervasive kaya and wisdom display of the
Buddhist. May practitioners of the profound and secret great perfection remain inseparable
from the innermost one taste awareness of wisdom mind.